Add guidelines for experimental CodeQL queries and libraries (#2909)
Semmle/ql: docs/experimental.md

## Requirements

1. **Directory structure**

    - Experimental queries and libraries are stored in the `experimental` subdirectory within each language-specific directory in the [CodeQL repository](https://github.com/Semmle/ql). For example, experimental Java queries and libraries are stored in `ql/java/ql/src/experimental` and any corresponding tests in `ql/java/ql/test/experimental`.
    - The structure of an `experimental` subdirectory mirrors the structure of standard queries and libraries (or tests) in the parent directory.

2. **Query metadata**

    - The query `@id` must not clash with any other queries in the repository.
    - The query must have a `@name` and `@description` to explain its purpose.
    - The query must have a `@kind` and `@problem.severity` as required by CodeQL tools.

    For details, see the [guide on query metadata](https://github.com/Semmle/ql/blob/master/docs/query-metadata-style-guide.md).

3. **Formatting**

    - The queries and libraries must be [autoformatted](https://help.semmle.com/codeql/codeql-for-vscode/reference/editor.html#autoformatting).

4. **Compilation**

>     - Compilation of the query and any associated libraries and tests must be resilient to future development of the standard libraries. This means that the functionality cannot depend on the output of `getAQlClass` and it cannot use internal APIs.

Reviewer: Should we include `toString` alongside `getAQlClass`? (I'm thinking here of the use of `toString` _inside_ a query to identify syntactic constructs, e.g.)

Reviewer 2: Such a requirement was in the original design doc, but we took it out because we couldn't find a clear way to phrase the distinction between depending on it in `.expected` files and inside the query -- essentially what @tausbn wrote in parenthesis.

Reviewer 3: Would it perhaps make sense to rule out regexp matching on `toString()`? That's a specific abuse we've seen a lot.

    - The query and any associated libraries and tests must not cause any compiler warnings to be emitted (such as use of deprecated functionality or missing `override` annotations).

5. **Results**

    - The query must have at least one true positive result on some revision of a real project.

> 6. **Contributor License Agreement**

Reviewer: Should we have an explicit mention that contributions should _not_ be covered by third-party copyright? This is already stated in the CLA, but perhaps a reminder is in order.

    - The contributor can satisfy the [CLA](CONTRIBUTING.md#contributor-license-agreement).

## Non-requirements

Other criteria typically required for our standard queries and libraries are not required for experimental queries and libraries. In particular, fully disciplined query [metadata](docs/query-metadata-style-guide.md), query [help](docs/query-help-style-guide.md), tests, a low false positive rate and performance tuning are not required (but nonetheless recommended).

> Experimental queries and libraries may not be actively maintained as the standard libraries evolve and may be removed in the future.

Reviewer 4: Not sure, but should we mention somewhere that breaking changes to experimental libraries can be expected (i.e., no need to use deprecation)?

Reviewer 5: I think this is very important. Can we move this line to the top? (i.e., before `## Requirements`)

Reviewer 2: Removing the library is the ultimate breaking change, and we've mentioned that. But I see your point -- it might be good to call it out.

> Experimental queries and libraries may not be actively maintained as the standard libraries evolve and may be removed in the future.

Reviewer 5: I think this is very important. Can we move this line to the top? (i.e., before `## Requirements`)

In addition to our standard CodeQL queries and libraries, this repository may also contain queries and libraries of a more experimental nature. Experimental queries and libraries can be improved incrementally and may eventually reach a sufficient maturity to be included in our standard libraries and queries.

> Experimental queries and libraries may not be actively maintained as the standard libraries evolve, may be changed in backwards-incompatible ways or may be removed entirely in the future without deprecation warnings.

Reviewer 6: This is rather long. Suggest simplifying it as follows but otherwise, please breakdown into shorter sentences.

```suggestion
Experimental queries and libraries are not actively maintained and may stop working as the standard libraries evolve.
```

I'd suggest omitting the extra information about backwards-compatibility, deprecation, and removal because there is no commitment given for this in the main contributing guidelines. Possibly those guidelines should be updated and then this section could state that, unlike the standard queries and libraries, there is no commitment to maintain the experimental files. The standard contributing document would explain what that maintenance involved.

Author: Happy to simplify as suggested.

@hvitved / @jbj: you had suggested making the lack of deprecation warnings explicit. Are you OK with this simplification?

Reviewer 4: > because there is no commitment given for this in the main contributing guidelines
But we still promise customers that we don't make braking changes to standard libraries, right?

Reviewer 2: I understand that this sentence is implicitly in contrast to the standard libraries, but it doesn't actually say so. It just warns users that these queries are excempt from any stability policy that either (1) may one day be written down for the standard libraries or (2) may be assumed to exist based on the maturity of our software.

I think the suggested simplification ("are not actively maintained") is too dire and goes against the purpose of the `experimental` dir, which is to accept contributions into a directory that doesn't just look like the Recycle Bin. I think the original version had just the right balance between avoiding a maintenance burden for ourselves and still acknowledging that the accepted queries are valuable.

Author: @felicitymay, if you'd like to break the sentence down into shorter ones, how about:

```suggestion
Experimental queries and libraries may not be actively maintained as the standard libraries evolve. They may also be changed in backwards-incompatible ways or may be removed entirely in the future without deprecation warnings.
```

Reviewer 6: Thanks. @yo-h - your suggestion LGTM.

> But we still promise customers that we don't make breaking changes to standard libraries, right?

I still think that this ought to go somewhere in this repository - in part it explains why there's a high bar to adding queries/libraries to the core directories.

Author: > I still think that this ought to go somewhere in this repository - in part it explains why there's a high bar to adding queries/libraries to the core directories.

I've added a paragraph to the standard contribution guidelines in 63adc63.

Reviewer 6: Thanks.

4. **Compilation**

>     - Compilation of the query and any associated libraries and tests must be resilient to future development of the standard libraries. This means that the functionality cannot use internal APIs, cannot depend on the output of `getAQlClass` and cannot make use of regexp matching on `toString`.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
    - Compilation of the query and any associated libraries and tests must be resilient to future development of the standard libraries. This means that the functionality cannot use internal APIs, cannot depend on the output of `getAQlClass`, and cannot make use of regexp matching on `toString`.
```
